Content: With the shift from SNP arrays to high-throughput sequencing, most researchers studying diseases in consanguineous families do not rely on linkage analysis any longer, but simply search for deleterious variants which are homozygous in all patients. AutozygosityMapper allows the fast and convenient identification of disease mutations in patients from consanguineous pedigrees by focussing on homozygous segments shared by all patients. Users can upload multi-sample VCF files, including WGS data, without any pre-processing. Genome-wide runs of homozygosity and the underlying genotypes are presented in graphical interfaces. AutozygosityMapper extends the functions of its predecessor, HomozygosityMapper, to the search for autozygous regions, in which all patients share the same homozygous genotype. We provide export of VCF files containing only the variants found in homozygous regions, this usually reduces the number of variants by two orders of magnitude. These regions can also directly be analysed with our disease mutation identification tool MutationDistiller. The application comes with simple and intuitive graphical interfaces for data upload, analysis, and results. We kept the structure of HomozygosityMapper so that previous users will find it easy to switch. With AutozygosityMapper, we provide a fast web-based way to identify disease mutations in consanguineous families. AutozygosityMapper is freely available at https://www.genecascade.org/AutozygosityMapper/.
Content: Precision medicine needs precise phenotypes. The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) uses clinical signs instead of diagnoses and has become the standard annotation for patients' phenotypes when describing single gene disorders. Use of the HPO beyond human genetics is however still limited. With SAMS (Symptom Annotation Made Simple), we want to bring sign-based phenotyping to routine clinical care, to hospital patients as well as to outpatients. Our web-based application provides access to three widely used annotation systems: HPO, OMIM, Orphanet. Whilst data can be stored in our database, phenotypes can also be imported and exported as Global Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH) Phenopackets without using the database. The web interface can easily be integrated into local databases, e.g. clinical information systems. SAMS offers users to share their data with others, empowering patients to record their own signs and symptoms (or those of their children) and thus provide their doctors with additional information. We think that our approach will lead to better characterised patients which is not only helpful for finding disease mutations but also to better understand the pathophysiology of diseases and to recruit patients for studies and clinical trials. SAMS is freely available at https://www.genecascade.org/SAMS/.
Content: While great advances in predicting the effects of coding variants have been made, the assessment of non-coding variants remains challenging. This is especially problematic for variants within promoter regions which can lead to over-expression of a gene or reduce or even abolish its expression. The binding of transcription factors to the DNA can be predicted using position weight matrices (PWMs). More recently, transcription factor flexible models (TFFMs) have been introduced and shown to be more accurate than PWMs. TFFMs are based on hidden Markov models and can account for complex positional dependencies. Our new web-based application FABIAN-variant uses 1224 TFFMs and 3790 PWMs to predict whether and to which degree DNA variants affect the binding of 1387 different human transcription factors. For each variant and transcription factor, the software combines the results of different models for a final prediction of the resulting binding-affinity change. The software is written in C++ for speed but variants can be entered through a web interface. Alternatively, a VCF file can be uploaded to assess variants identified by high-throughput sequencing. The search can be restricted to variants in the vicinity of candidate genes. FABIAN-variant is available freely at https://www.genecascade.org/fabian/.
Content: Genes implicated in the Golgi and endosomal trafficking machinery are crucial for brain development, and mutations in them are particularly associated with postnatal microcephaly (POM). Exome sequencing was performed in three affected individuals from two unrelated consanguineous families presenting with delayed neurodevelopment, intellectual disability of variable degree, POM and failure to thrive. Patient-derived fibroblasts were tested for functional effects of the variants. We detected homozygous truncating variants in ATP9A. While the variant in family A is predicted to result in an early premature termination codon, the variant in family B affects a canonical splice site. Both variants lead to a substantial reduction of ATP9A mRNA expression. It has been shown previously that ATP9A localises to early and recycling endosomes, whereas its depletion leads to altered gene expression of components from this compartment. Consistent with previous findings, we also observed overexpression of ARPC3 and SNX3, genes strongly interacting with ATP9A. In aggregate, our findings show that pathogenic variants in ATP9A cause a novel autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorder with POM. While the physiological function of endogenous ATP9A is still largely elusive, our results underline a crucial role of this gene in endosomal transport in brain tissue.